{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang2057{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang9 On Vampires\par
Modern media has really warped vampires. Nowadays we have vampires that sparkle and constitute the ultimate teenage romance. However, this is most certainly not where vampires began.\par
\par
Vampires are Metaphors for Rapists\par
\par
Yup, you read that right. Things might get a little touchy here, but this is all very true.\par
\par
Sex in Media\par
\par
In the olden days, portraying sex in any way in public media was extremely taboo. Writers didn\rquote t write about it and, later on, filmmakers didn\rquote t even imply it in their work. If you go back and watch some old black-and-white films, even married couples are portrayed as sleeping in separate beds.\par
\par
Creative people had to get crafty in order to talk about sex in entertainment media, and often used subtext and metaphors to convey the idea. Vampires are one of the results of this. If you can\rquote t talk about a man forcing himself on a woman for sex, instead you talk about a man forcing himself on a woman for her blood because he \ldblquote needs it\rdblquote . Suddenly it becomes acceptable to show to the mass media.\par
\par
The Ultimate Man\par
\par
If you think of vampires, be they Dracula or Strahd or even Edward Cullen, they all have similar airs about them. They\rquote re all powerful, well-learned, wealthy men and usually have a heavy level of societal influence. Strahd is technically a King, after all, even though he refers to himself as a Count.\par
\par
These aspects make vampires the ultimate catch. They\rquote re meant to represent the extreme upper class and therefor the husband that every woman wants. In more modern times, our cultural ideals for romance have thankfully become more fluid and accepting. But when we talk about vampires, this is generally the archaic form of love we see.\par
\par
Because vampires are the ultimate man they\rquote re able to get away with quite a bit, and that includes abusing their lovers. Vampires are meant to represent that even aristocrats and kings are capable of being monsters when the sun goes down. All their wealth and cunning doesn\rquote t change the fact that they are abominations. The same can be said of a politician or wealthy businessman who regularly abuses his power to get away with taking advantage of others. The need for sex is a carnal and visceral desire and so is a vampire\rquote s need for blood. When the powerful give into that desire, the result is monstrous.\par
\par
Psychologically Diagnosing Strahd\par
Now that we have an idea of where vampires come from and what they are supposed to represent, let's look more specifically at Strahd. We already know how he acts and how he fights, but why? Let's figure it out.\par
\par
But firstly, a quick disclaimer. While I took a few years of psychology and sociology courses in college, I am far from an actual, licensed professional. Most of what's here comes from analysis, looking up some psych journals, and going back to my copy of the DSM (Diagnostic Stat Manual for Mental Disorders) for reference. So yeah. While I consider myself well researched, I'm definitely no expert. XD\par
\par
Strahd is Not a Psychopath/Sociopath\par
\par
Yes, he has some symptoms of psychopathy, but he's actually totally not. He's just a really bad person with delusional self-justifications. But I'll go into all that in a minute.\par
\par
What is Psychopathy?\par
\par
Well, firstly you guys should know that Psychopathy and Sociopathy are the same illness. Like literally. They are simply alternative names for Antisocial Personality Disorder.\par
\par
Some professionals like to suggest that psychopaths are merely more extreme versions of sociopaths. Others say that psychopaths are violent and sociopaths are not. And still others suggest that psychopaths are more passion killers while sociopaths feel nothing at all.\par
\par
But, as written in the official diagnosis, none of that is true. It's just Antisocial Personality Disorder. While I love Sherlock as much as the next nerd, "high-functioning sociopath" is not a politically correct term. (So stawp calling Strahd that, ya dweebs! ;P)\par
\par
So how does the DSM diagnose APD? With the following symptoms:\par
\par
"There is a pervasive pattern of disregard for and violation of the rights of others occurring since age 15 years, as indicated by three (or more) of the following:\par
\par
Failure to conform to social norms with respect to lawful behaviors as indicated by repeatedly performing acts that are grounds for arrest.\par
\par
Deceitfulness, as indicated by repeated lying, use of aliases, or conning others for personal profit or pleasure.\par
\par
Impulsivity or failure to plan ahead.\par
\par
Irritability and aggressiveness, as indicated by repeated physical fights or assaults.\par
\par
Reckless disregard for safety of self or others.\par
\par
Consistent irresponsibility, as indicated by repeated failure to sustain consistent work behavior or honor financial obligations.\par
\par
Lack of remorse, as indicated by being indifferent to or rationalizing having hurt, mistreated, or stolen from another.\par
\par
The individual is at least age 18 years.\par
\par
There is evidence of conduct disorder with onset before age 15 years.\par
\par
The occurrence of antisocial behavior is not exclusively during the course of schizophrenia or a manic episode."\par
\par
Phew. What a mouthful. Okie dokie, let me nicely lay out why Strahd does NOT fit that mold.\par
\par
Point 1: "Not respecting social norms and doing bad things for the sake of doing bad things."\par
\par
Strahd is an exceptionally lawful individual and has been his entire life.\par
\par
In his own words, he "squandered his youth" being a dutiful prince leading armies off to war. He has a healthy respect for rules and the only time he actually stepped outside the law was during the Sergei/Tatyana murders. And that law breaking was not done because Strahd didn't care about the law, his brother, or Tatyana. Instead, Strahd cared but invented justifications for himself to avoid feeling guilty or assuming blame.\par
\par
Even afterwards, in his time as a vampire and during the campaign, Strahd does not hurt someone unless he feels the punishment is earned. Is the punishment actually always earned? No. But does Strahd believe it is? Yes.\par
\par
Strahd actually has a very strong internal moral code which he is loath to break. He's not drowning Berez "just cause." He's doing it because they killed Marina and therefore deserve to die.\par
\par
Point 2: "Lying for personal gain."\par
\par
In the campaign, we actually do have a distinct example of this behavior in the form of Strahd's alter ego, Vasili. He does, in fact, assume a different name in order to trick others into trusting him.\par
\par
However, Strahd does not lie on a regular basis. In fact, he is usually very upfront and honorable when addressing others. He speaks his mind, listens to others' opinions and replies accordingly. If he withholds information, it's usually under reasonable terms.\par
\par
For instance, if players were to ask what happened to Tatyana, Strahd might say that he "lost her in a horrible accident." To Strahd, this is the complete truth. He certainly didn't mean for Tatyana to kill herself. And talking about the the gritty details of someone's suicide isn't exactly polite conversation, so it makes sense for him not to mention them (*cough* reference back to point one where he respects social norms).\par
\par
So while Vasili is indeed an alter ego and a lie, one drink does not an alcoholic make. We certainly wouldn't label Aladdin a psychopath for assuming the role of Prince Ali to get the girl of his dreams. And we certainly wouldn't label Jasmine a psychopath for pretending to be a peasant to escape her palace life. Their circumstances justify their deceits more than the intense, remorseless lies of a psychopath.\par
\par
Point 3: "Impulsive and not planning ahead."\par
\par
I would hardly call Strahd impulsive. If anything, he's an extremely calm and calculating individual. He was a freaking General in an army for the first couple decades of his life, for goodness sake. And a damn good General at that, from what we're told.\par
\par
He even carefully planned out his own brother's murder. It wasn't a passion killing. So it's not like even his violence is impulsive.\par
\par
Point 4: Being super aggressive.\par
\par
Yes, he's a murderer. Yes, he's no stranger to bloodshed. But Strahd isn't the type to pick a fight without reason. He also doesn't take life without reason. To be repetitive, he's calm and calculating, rarely loosing his temper.\par
\par
Point 5: Not caring about safety of self or others.\par
\par
While Strahd certainly doesn't worry about his own safety, he's also fully aware that he is an all-powerful vampire. He doesn't need to be safe. If he were mortal, he'd likely put in a little more care when charging into danger. But as he is, he's technically always safe. Should the players eventually prove themselves a real threat to his life and reign, Strahd will most definitely do something about it. He isn't nonchalant about his power.\par
\par
As for others, Strahd actually does care about people, if only for his warped sense of morality. In I, Strahd, for instance, he frequently protects others. Though he may not particularly care about these individuals, he also clearly doesn't want them harmed because they don't deserve to be harmed. And, in most instances, these people are under his protection as Lord of Barovia, so he feels it is his duty to keep them alive. So maybe he doesn't care for the right reasons, but he certainly does care.\par
\par
Point 6: Irresponsibility\par
\par
lololololol Strahd was collecting taxes a month after loosing Tatyana and being turned into a vampire.\par
\par
Point 7: Lack of remorse and rationalizing bad behavior.\par
\par
STRAHD HAS THIS ONE. This is literally the only of the seven criteria of APD that Strahd actually has. When he does wrong, he rarely feels remorse and when he does something clearly awful, it's because he's somehow justified the act to himself. So BING, one point for Strahd.\par
\par
Those Last Points: Evidence of APD as an adolescent.\par
\par
As far as we know, Strahd was a perfect little angel when he was a kid. He certainly wasn't out killing cats or something. The only evidence of his villain side that we have begins with Sergei and Tatyana's deaths, much later in his life.\par
\par
And SO. My dear friends. STRAHD IS NOT A SOCIOPATH.\par
\par
Strahd's Personality\par
I know what you're thinking. "Okay, Mandy, so what is actually wrong with Strahd? He's clearly the villain."\par
\par
Strahd doesn't actually have a mental disorder. He's just a terrible person. Remember, not all murderers are diagnosable, even if they are fictional vampire overlords. Sometimes people are just cruel.\par
\par
If you're looking for something more specific, Strahd is plagued by delusional, self-justifying behavior. And, while not an actual narcissist, he also has a rather inflated ego that pushes him to abuse the people who submit themselves to him. These aren't mental illnesses, though, just personality traits.\par
\par
Delusional\par
\par
We all justify things to ourselves in order to handle life. It's normal. It's natural. It's human. We say, "Oh I worked out hard this week so it's okay for me to have some cake." We tell ourselves, "So what if I speed a little? Everyone else does it so it's okay." And, for the most part, these little lies that we tell ourselves are harmless. Even though the cake is technically bad for you, we intrinsically know that it's not a big deal to indulge.\par
\par
When these self-justifications grow, gain consistency, and then get out of hand, we have a problem. That is what's happened to Strahd. For instance:\par
\par
Strahd is intelligent enough to know that his inability to claim Tatyana's soul is directly linked to his power and vampirism. He knows that if he were to give up his immortality, he'd be able to finally have the woman he loves.\par
\par
Instead, he refuses to do so because he values his power more than his love. However, Strahd himself is unaware of this fact, living in perpetual self-doubt. He tells himself that if he were to give up his eternal life, he would grow old and therefore be unworthy of Tatyana. He tells himself that without his power, he would no longer be appealing to Tatyana.\par
\par
But the root of the matter is that Strahd loves his power and is unwilling to give it up. And Strahd is so obsessed with his own delusion of loving Tatyana, he doesn't see that fact.\par
\par
The same can be said for his killer nature.\par
\par
As I said before, Strahd is no passion killer. He rarely lets his emotions overwhelm his rational mind. So how could any lawful, rational man allow himself to kill hundreds of people? Because he justifies it to himself.\par
\par
Strahd is the kind of person that would murder a man's children to punish that man. Strahd would tell himself that the death of the children wasn't his fault; that if the man had only followed his law, the children would still be alive. But we can all clearly see that Strahd has committed an unforgivable atrocity. Strahd can't see that at all. He would feel bad that the children had to die. He would see it as a horrible loss. But Strahd in no way would feel any guilt or regret over the murders.\par
\par
Similarly, to Strahd, the PCs deserve to be hunted. They're keeping Tatyana (Ireena) from him. They're defying him. They're breaking the laws of the land. They're disrespecting the king. So hunting them down and destroying anything and everything that gets in his way is totally okay.\par
\par
In Romance\par
\par
Though the RAW CoS text isn't terribly specific, the book combined with some outside material clearly shows us that Strahd doesn't actually turn people into vampires who don't want to be turned.\par
\par
Patrina (the dusk elf woman), for instance, came to him. He in no way forced Patrina to be his lover.\par
\par
Gertruda, the young human girl in Castle Ravenloft, is also there of her own volition technically.\par
\par
The problem comes when we also take into account Strahd's delusional behavior. In some manner, Strahd actually believes that his ability to charm people is a nonmagical version of enlightenment. He believes that those charmed by his will are simply being encouraged to realize their true, underlying feelings.\par
\par
This delusion is why he honestly believes that Tatyana loved him. Strahd charmed her and she came to him in love. And Strahd believed - still believes - that to be her true nature.\par
\par
However, this is entirely untrue. Really, Strahd's ability to charm his lovers is nothing short of a magical version of the date-rape drug. Though he believes the romance to be reciprocated, he's completely wrong.\par
\par
That's not to say that Strahd isn't entirely wrong either. For as many lovers/spawn he's had to charm, there are just as many who didn't need that push. And, perhaps, that's where the line truly blurs for Strahd. He can no longer tell the difference between those who have real romantic inclinations towards him and those who do not.\par
\par
This harkens back to what I was saying about vampires representing the perfect man. Strahd is, in fact, a highly desirable individual on the surface. He's not bad looking. He's rich and a king. He's extremely well mannered and battle hardened. And, to top it all off, Strahd knows it. He knows how attractive he is and so has no reason to question it when someone flirts with him. (Even if that person is a sheltered, sixteen-year-old who's basically the definition of statutory rape. #Gertruda)\par
\par
Abusive Ego\par
\par
I believe that the root problem in all of this is Strahd's pride. Pride is Strahd's deadliest sin and it leads him to do terrible things.\par
\par
Strahd is so proud that he believes there's no way someone could ever refuse him romantically. Tatyana's denial was a misunderstanding on her part. There's simply no way she didn't love him.\par
\par
Strahd is so proud that he believes his word is law and is therefore above question. When Strahd says someone should die, they must deserve to die. There's no way his judgment could be in error.\par
\par
Strahd is so proud that he believes it is an honor to be a part of his harem of consorts. So what if he locks them up in the catacombs for all eternity? They wanted this didn't they?\par
\par
If Strahd ever managed to learn a healthy amount of self doubt and humility, he might realize the absolutely horrible things he's done. But, if that happened, his own sense of lawful justice would likely so overwhelm him with guilt he'd feel he himself deserved to die. So, in a way, his delusions are a form of self-preservation, protecting his own mind from the monster he's become.\par
\par
Presenting Strahd In-Game\par
Lastly, I'd like to discuss how to present Strahd as a NPC and a villain in your game.\par
\par
Mechanically\par
\par
For stats and battle plans and instructions on how to mess with the PCs, there really is no better guide than u/guildsbounty's Strahd post. I won't do it the injustice of trying to rewrite or summarize it for you guys, so you'll just have to go read the gloriousness for yourselves. ;)\par
\par
And for an actual stat block, there's a CR 27 version of Strahd on the DM's Guild that is well worth the two dollars.\par
\par
General Actions in His Vampire Life\par
\par
Pursuing Tatyana\par
\par
For all of his pride and talent, there's one thing that Strahd can never have: youth. And that hurts him immensely. For the man who has it all, one base denial can be maddening. And that is what Tatyana represents to Strahd. She is youth incarnate and, in Strahd's mind, obtaining her is like obtaining the holy grail.\par
\par
Though Strahd claims these feelings as true love, it is nothing more than an extreme obsession. Strahd himself can not tell the difference, honestly believing he and Tatyana are soul mates.\par
\par
Collecting Consorts\par
\par
Strahd has a fascination with collecting beautiful and/or interesting people to be his consorts. Biologically, he uses them for their blood. After a while, he turns them into vampire spawn that entertain him mentally and physically. And finally, when they are no longer entertaining, he seals them away in the underground crypt so that no one else can have them.\par
\par
Strahd has had a variety of different consorts. Though it\rquote s made evident that he primarily prefers women, he\rquote s also had a few male consorts as seen in both Escher and Doru.\par
\par
Intellectual consorts are always preferred.\par
\par
No matter what he himself might believe, Strahd does not actually care about his consorts. Strahd may refer to his consorts as lovers, may even think he feels some slight romance for them, but they are literally nothing but toys to him, to be used for a while and then placed on a shelf and replaced with a newer model.\par
\par
Finding an Heir\par
\par
Strahd is not looking for a successor. At least not really. He's a centuries old vampire lord with nothing better to do, is all. He's read every book in his libraries at least twice, he's the master of several crafts, his kingdom basically runs itself for fear of him, and he's got all the romance and blood he could possibly need.\par
\par
Strand's life has basically come to a stagnation. The years in between Tatyana's reincarnations are wrought with overwhelming boredom. At some point, Strahd gave himself a task to find an heir to keep his own mind busy.\par
\par
But as yet another of Strad's delusions, Strahd doesn't see it that way. He honestly believes he's searching for a successor. But, in truth, the fact that no one ever meets his expectations is just another self-justification to keep his power.\par
\par
Show, Don't Tell\par
\par
When role-playing Strahd with your players, do your best to consider him as the multilayered, confused, and overconfident individual I've hopefully defined in this post.\par
\par
Like with any NPC, you shouldn't have to tell your players any of this information. Simply by having conversations with the big baddy, your players should be able to discern the discrepancies between Strahd's words and Strahd's actions all on their own.\par
\par
One Last Thing\par
This should be considered common sense. But this is the internet. And the internet is a crazy place. So I'll say it anyway.\par
\par
Sex in d&d\par
\par
Yes, I just established that vampires are the fantasy versions of rapists. Yes, I just wrote a whole lot about how Strahd literally keeps a harem to satisfy his own desires. But holy goodness DO NOT have sex/rape actually in your game!\par
\par
It's fine to imply that some awful things are going on behind the scenes. Imply that Strahd might have raped Ireena if he manages to capture her in-game. But don't actually describe stuff like that. Don't make your players walk into a rape scene.\par
\par
It's also fine to have the bad guys flirt with your player characters. Strahd and other vampires can make comments with sexual undertones. In fact, these instances can be funny if played right. But under no circumstances should Strahd or anyone else try to rape a player! Ever!\par
\par
That being said, know your players.\par
\par
If you're playing with a group of friends that you're very familiar with, you should know what they will and will not be comfortable with.\par
\par
However, if you're only d&d buddies, err on the side of caution and remember to keep things light with the in-game romance.\par
\par
---------\par
\par
Phew! Alright. Hopefully the contents of this post have helped you guys understand Strahd as a character. I've seen more than one post drift across the subreddit with people unsatisfied with the portrayal of Strahd's character. Those only referencing the campaign book usually find him flat and boring, no more than another horrible villain without depth. Those referencing outside material like I, Strahd often sympathize with Strahd too much, unable to see him as menacing anymore. So maybe this helps? XD\par
\par
Love you guys and until next time,\par
\par
Mandy\par
}
 